Ladies and gentlemen,
please welcome Vice President,
OS Software, Craig Federighi.
Hello everybody.
Did you have a good morning?
Yeah, that was some pretty nice stuff.
Well, I am thrilled to be able to kick
off the technical session here at,
and we're going the other direction.
Let's go this way.
Let's go forward today.
So I'm here to kick off the
technical sessions here at WWDC.
Now this morning,
we heard a lot of pretty
astounding claims about the amount,
the number of new developer
APIs that were available.
1,500 new APIs for iOS 5 and a
staggering 3,000 new APIs for Lion.
Now I know a lot of you in the
audience are engineers like
me and are detail oriented.
You want to get to the bottom of this.
You want to learn about every
single one of these APIs.
We have this hall, I think,
all afternoon,
and I think there's no time
like the present to dig in.
I want to start alphabetically
with the Accelerate framework.
Accelerate.
We're going to start with the
first header in Accelerate.
This is alpha.h.
So, V image alpha blend planar 8
takes the following arguments.
No, alright.
Seriously, okay.
Let's work our way through.
Craig Federighi, very nice crowd.
All right, let's seriously,
let's step back.
So our users love the beautiful devices,
these physical objects that we make.
But I think as Steve said
it best this morning,
as software people,
I think we feel it's the software
that's really the soul of these systems.
These excellent applications,
whether they be for the Mac, the iPhone,
or the iPad, are really, I think,
what embody the true
experience of our platforms.
And we're going to talk today
about these set of platforms.
This is what this week is really about,
the platforms that let you
create these great apps.
And I want to start by talking about
our desktop and mobile platforms
and really how they came to be.
You know,
because most companies in our industry
have started down this path of saying,
you know,
there are two totally separate monoliths.
And in fact,
they put a wall between them and
caused them to grow apart over time.
This is bad for users and
ultimately bad for developers.
So what are the two different
platforms that we're talking about?
And what are the two developers
who want to target these platforms?
Well, from the start,
we took a very different
path with Mac OS X and iOS.
As we all know,
iOS was actually born out of
the foundations of Mac OS X.
And over time,
we've taken innovations and
inspirations from iOS and
brought them back to the Mac.
But these platforms actually
sit on a common base of code.
And so at this point, as we innovate,
those innovations actually
feed both platforms.
So what is that platform?
Well, it starts down, of course,
at the bottom with Core OS,
all the Unix stuff,
including some really awesome
capabilities around power management,
some really differentiated
security architecture.
But as developers,
we usually start interfacing
at the level of core services,
things like the foundation
set of object-oriented APIs,
grand central dispatch, core data,
higher-level networking interfaces.
You move up the stack
into graphics and media,
and you have things like
our 2D drawing model,
Quartz, and core graphics.
Core media for audio and video,
OpenGL ES and OpenGL,
and then WebKit for HTML5.
These layers are all completely
common across these platforms.
It's when you get to the highest
level of Cocoa and Cocoa Touch where
the frameworks actually diverge,
but for good reason,
because we believe that fundamentally
the requirements of a Mac and
of a touchscreen device like an
iPhone and iPad are different.
And so the view system, the controls,
the navigation mechanisms necessarily
should be different for those layers.
Now we also then have a set
of common tools and languages
that serve both platforms.
Our investment in things like Xcode,
LLVM and instruments help with
innovations across this entire stack.
Now if you look at Lion and iOS 5,
there have been a lot of cases where
technologies that premiered on one
actually now are available on the other.
And I want to go through a few of
these because it's pretty interesting.
At the Core OS level,
sandboxing is something that
actually started in iOS 5 and now
as we'll talk about later has come
to the Mac while some security
features like our SSL transport
has become public API now in iOS 5.
At the core services layer,
take something like core location.
Of course, originally pioneered on iOS,
now on the Mac and the Mac's
accelerate framework has now
come in its full glory to iOS 5.
At the graphics and media layer,
in iOS 4, we saw the introduction of
AV Foundation with video editing,
playback, there's audio and video.
It's now come the full API set
to Lion while core image,
as you heard this morning,
has come from the Mac to iOS.
Even when you get to the
top of the stack where the
frameworks are actually distinct,
there are inspirations and design
patterns that have fed across both.
So in the case if you're
a Cocoa Touch developer,
you know about the view-based table view.
If you've ever then tried to go to Cocoa,
you said, "Hold on,
what's all this NSL stuff?" Well now,
we have a view-based table view in Cocoa.
Yeah, that's a good thing.
Yeah, yeah.
Check it out.
It makes animations much easier.
It's really phenomenal.
And in Cocoa Touch,
we brought basically NS document
over for document-based apps.
This is great as well.
But of course, there are also apps.
I'm going to show you a couple of them.
But there are also innovations that are
at the bottom of all of these things,
things like Grand Central Dispatch and
the new Cloud APIs that are concurrently
becoming available for both platforms.
So as we built this platform--
What did we build it out of?
What was our philosophy?
The things that really
went to make it up.
Did we choose something
like Carbon fiber,
sort of a high performance
but cantankerous material?
Or did we choose steel?
It's reliable but it sure is heavy.
Or did we use duct tape and bailing wire?
Never, never.
What actually we took approach
focused really on pragmatism.
It's this balance of
idealism and realism.
You know, we would not compromise on
true object orientation.
We've always needed a dynamic runtime.
And we make extensive use throughout
our object oriented frameworks of
design patterns like delegation,
notification, key value coding,
key value observer,
model view controller and so forth.
But at the same time we needed a
system native language that had the
performance and efficiency required
for our full range of products.
How did we do that?
Well with Objective C.
Now how's that worked out?
Effectively pretty well.
We've been able to scale Objective C from
powerful many core desktop platforms
down to the most demanding sort of small
memory relatively low power devices
and get fantastic battery life and
responsiveness out of these platforms.
But this has come at one cost
that all of us collectively bear.
And that's manual memory management.
Right, we've all done this and we've all
made a few mistakes along the way.
In fact, Apple's been making this
tremendous investment over time
in Xcode and developer tools.
And those of you who've run our
static analyzer have actually
seen that the static analyzer
will point out things for you.
Like you should have retained here
or you should have released there.
And maybe it occurred to
you as it occurred to us.
If it can tell me that,
why can't it just do it for me?
Well, it turns out later today you're
going to hear about how we brought
the speed of explicit object
management and combined it with the
simplicity of garbage collection.
This is going to be very big.
Andreas isn't going to be
happy that I spilled the beans,
but he's going to talk about
it more in the next talk.
And also, after that,
you're going to get a fantastic
talk about a number of technologies
and graphics and media.
These will be much better talks than
the one you're experiencing right now.
I will be covering the
rest of our frameworks.
And so I want to talk about the platforms
that we are delivering here at WWDC,
and in particular,
how they enable you to build great apps.
You know,
all of you have really set the bar for
customers in terms of what they expect
from a great application experience.
And I want to look at the new
capabilities that we brought to our
platforms through that lens of how
they help you continue to develop
an experience that delivers on users
and exceeds users' expectations.
So what do our users expect?
Well, they want apps that are simple,
that provide immersive experiences,
that are fast and responsive,
that are secure and
increasingly that are connected.
Well, let's start with simplicity.
We've all seen user
interfaces look like this.
It's really easy to make a mistake
and really hard to know how to
accomplish the basic task that
you're put to inside this UI.
We really would seek to develop
something a little more like this.
I think even I might be able to do this.
And to some extent,
I think we've started to achieve that.
You know,
if any of you have young children,
you've seen a one or two
or three-year-old pick
up an iPhone or an iPad,
they become immersed in that
device with no teaching whatsoever.
It's just, it's immediate and visceral
how to work with that.
And so we've taken some of our learnings
here and applied them to the Mac in
terms of the full-screen gestures
that you heard about this morning.
So, of course, for the Mac,
things are different.
We don't believe in a touchscreen
Mac where I keep my arms suspended like
this all day and smudging up my screen.
It's just not the right
way to work with a Mac.
We have these fantastic
multi-touch trackpads.
When you have those fantastic
multi-touch trackpads,
you can do things to simplify,
like taking away scrollers.
And so now we have overlay scroll bars.
These are controls that are not
visible when you're not scrolling.
But in fact, they're configurable.
Now, most of the time,
you don't have to do anything.
If you're using NSScrollView,
you're going to get overlay
scrollers by default,
unless your user is using
a non-multi-touch device,
in which case you'll
get legacy scrollers.
But if you have the need,
you can request legacy scrollers.
There's another case in which
you would get legacy scrollers,
and I don't think any of us want to be in
the legacy camp if we don't have to be.
And that's when you have controls
that you put in the scroll alley.
We've all seen apps that say, "Well,
we're wasting all the space in
the app." "We're wasting space
for a scroll alley anyway,
so let's put the magnification
control and the view selector." Well,
if you do that, of course,
we have no choice but to fill the
remaining area with scroll bars.
So this is something that
you want to get rid of.
These are no longer what you want.
Now,
one of the more controversial changes
that we've made for Lion is we've changed
the mapping of the scrolling direction.
Now, it turns out that if you look
at really the way it works,
and let's say Snow Leopard or on a PC,
you push up on the scroll bar,
not because you're
pushing the content up,
but actually because you're
pushing the scroll bar up,
which is going to push the content down.
It's in fact exactly the opposite
of dealing with your content.
You're moving the viewport,
you're not moving the content.
Well, in Lion, we said no,
We're going to say when
you move your finger up,
you're pushing the content up.
That's the most natural thing and it
turns out it feels great as soon as
you flip your brain entirely around.
So, there was a time we flipped it
around internally of course and
people started running and they said,
you know I think there's
something fundamental here.
I think there's something about a
trackpad where it really just has to
work backwards and it's you know the
people are never going to get it.
It's going to be impossible.
It turns out and I implore
you all to do this.
Give it a week.
Try.
Your brain will flip and then
you won't be able to use your
snow leopard machines anymore.
So give it a try.
It's really great.
Most of the time, as a developer,
you don't have to do anything
in order to react to the
change in scrolling direction.
But there are some cases where you do.
If you have a place where
you're interpreting scroll
events to physically model,
let's say, moving a slider, well,
when we-- or a play head, for instance,
on a playback tool, well,
then when we flip the scroll direction,
suddenly the user moving their
fingers right is going to
cause your control to go left.
For those rare cases,
we have an API that let you be
aware of the scrolling direction
and adapt to it directly.
But normally,
you don't have to worry about this.
There's another area where we've
simplified by taking something away,
and that's with navigation gestures.
Previously in Snow Leopard, for instance,
you had navigation gestures
usually took three or four
fingers to move between pages.
We've taken a finger away,
not with a cleaver or anything,
but we've just taken the necessity
to have those fingers away
by making the scroll gesture
capable of doing navigation.
So if you move your fingers to scroll,
you in fact are going
to be able to navigate.
But you may be asking, "Well, hold on,
that's the scroll gesture.
What about scrolling?" Well,
let me give you a quick demonstration
to show you how it works.
And while I'm at it,
I'm just going to show you a couple
of other things about scrolling.
So I'm going to bring up a web page here.
Let's bring up the
Wikipedia page about Lion.
So of course, I can push my content up,
pull it down.
I can flick and I get momentum.
It's all a lot of fun.
I can bounce at the top like this.
One thing, this is-- on the Mac,
you can often have very long documents.
And you could, of course,
wheel away and scroll and
scroll and scroll and scroll,
which works great most of the time.
But one thing we didn't mention
this morning is that if you do
need to get at your scroll bar,
in fact, you can.
So if I start scrolling and then
I move toward the scroll thumb,
it stays visible.
When I get to it, the alley appears.
And I can click and move very quickly,
scroll my whole document
end to end very quickly.
Now note, though,
this isn't truly a hover area.
I can't go over here and just
hover and have it come up.
Because there could be content in
the underlying document that I'm
trying to get at and the scroll
bar would keep getting in the way.
So you actually start
scrolling with your fingers.
And then you just move toward the alley.
And you can manipulate the scroll bar.
Now I want to show you a little
bit about that scroll to navigate.
We're going to drill in here on a site.
And I'm going to drill down to
another page within this site.
and I'm going to scroll, okay?
And as I scroll to the side,
what you're going to see is what actually
happens is I start pulling the page.
I start navigating, right?
I pull and I navigate.
But what happens if I zoom in such
that I have horizontal scrolling?
You see now there's a
horizontal scroll bar there.
Well, now as I scroll,
I actually hit the end.
I'm actually scrolling, right?
If I go here, I hit the end,
but now that I'm at the end,
I pull aside and I'm navigating.
95% of the time,
your user has content that
isn't horizontally scrolling,
and they just flick, flick,
flick to navigate.
But if they find themselves
in a condition like this
where they're scrolling,
they scroll, and then they keep pulling
through and they navigate.
So that's how that works with
scrolling and navigation in Lion.
Let's go back to a moment to the slides.
[Transcript missing]
So how do you implement versions?
Well, pretty much use NSDocument.
But if your main document window in
the application is what shows up in
that time machine-like versions UI.
And so when you're in there,
if your app has needs where it
doesn't make sense to have this
operation appear in versions,
you can do a version-specific UI,
or changes specific to versions,
by listening for the notifications
that tell you that that's
actually the context for your UI.
So let's talk now about
immersive experiences.
We know the iPad, for instance,
has great full-screen
immersive experience.
And we took that lesson
and brought it to the Mac.
And you've seen that in apps like
Preview that take a windowed interface
and provide a context where you're
completely immersed in the app.
Well,
you've heard about how full screen is
now system-wide capability in Lion.
There's some important differences if you
have a full app that supports full screen
currently when you move it to Lion.
For one,
full screen is no longer the system
global mode where the idea is the
user can't do anything until they
exit out of full screen because
they're just they're locked in full
screen then they have to get out.
So things like the menu bar in the
dock need to stay accessible at all
times even when you're in full screen.
You also have a lot of options about
how standard controls behave when
you're in full screen to adapt your UI.
And I want to show you a couple of
examples of how things like the toolbars
can behave differently depending
on the right context for the app.
So let's take a quick look at that.
I'm going to start with a really
simple full screen experience.
And that is iCal.
I'm going to take iCal.
You know,
so iCal has a toolbar here that actually
is useful all the time pretty much.
If I'm looking at my calendar,
I probably want access to these controls.
So when I go full screen,
we see that in this case,
the toolbar stays visible.
I can get at all of these controls.
But if I want to get, for instance,
at my menu bar as I go up,
it isn't just that the menu comes down,
it's that the whole toolbar comes down.
So this happens automatically
if you're using NS Toolbar,
but if your controls are just
tiled into the top of your window
and we don't know about them,
we can't animate them down.
So you're going to want to make
sure you put everything that needs
to move down into your toolbar.
We also have popovers.
So this is now a standard control,
the popover control.
And you want to think about,
in many cases,
as your app goes full screen,
that instead of using floating palettes,
which could then stay and clutter
the full screen experience,
that you transition to popovers.
And there are really
simple APIs for doing that.
Now, if you look at an
application here like Safari,
notice right now Safari is
actually showing my bookmarks bar.
If I take that full screen--
Notice that the bookmarks bar
actually disappears because
Safari has put that part of its view
in what's called the accessory view.
It's a new API in the toolbar such
that it's only revealed when the
rest of the toolbar is animated down.
So you can have certain controls that you
tuck away while in full screen but make
them accessible on demand to your users.
So that's another alternative.
But the most ambitious area
where you'll see us using in full
screen is something like preview.
So here in preview you see
I have right now a sidebar up.
I have a single page
view of this document.
And now I'm going to
take this full screen.
And the first thing I want you to
notice is the custom transition as
we move from full from a single page
view to a facing pages wide view.
You see that the page actually swept
out from behind into a transition
where now we have facing pages.
Let's go out and you'll
watch it tuck away.
And as it tucks away,
it actually even fades back
in the sidebar and the chrome.
So let's watch that again.
But these controls,
you notice also now I'm completely
focused on the content because
Preview has opted to hide its toolbars
completely and to hide its sidebars.
So depending on your app,
in Keynote when I'm editing,
I want to have my sidebar
actually available all the time,
but in Preview it doesn't.
It doesn't make sense.
So this is really the kind of
tradeoff decision that you have
to make as you design your app,
but we've provided all the
framework ability for you to set
those policies in a sensible way.
So how do you implement full screen apps?
Well, there are APIs in NS Application to
say that your app supports full screen.
You can identify which windows
are capable of going full screen.
For instance,
Mail's main window goes full screen,
but there's no full screen control
on each of its composed windows.
So you have that choice.
And as I mentioned,
a lot of APIs are on Toolbar and so
forth to handle revealing behavior.
We also in WebKit now have
JavaScript APIs for going full
screen for your web apps as well.
Now, in iOS,
Of course, immersive experiences often
are all about immersive games,
extremely responsive,
high performance games.
This often means coding in OpenGL ES.
And there's a lot of boilerplate code
that's been necessary traditionally
to get your app all set up for OpenGL.
Well, no longer.
This afternoon you'll hear about GL Kit.
That, yeah, GL Kit makes it--
Really a few lines of code to get your
context all right to do your OpenGL game.
We also have UI kit skinning.
So you're building a game and yeah,
this is important.
Because you built a
game with a custom look,
and you don't want to have to reinvent
the wheel in terms of implementing
custom controls that match the look
of the environment of your game.
Well, now with UIKit Skinning,
you can set custom images, tint colors,
and set the custom look of those
controls to appear either globally
across your app or contextually
based on where you are in the app.
We're going to hear more
about this this afternoon.
So another value that users--
another expectations of users
is that our apps are fast.
They want blazingly fast performance,
and they don't want to wait.
Now, we have all kinds of computational
power at our disposal.
We have very fast CPUs.
Often we have multiple cores.
It's not for lack of computation
often that we're waiting.
It's because we may be tying up
the main thread doing something
while at the same time we're just
squandering the rest of our resources.
Well,
we all know the solution to this problem.
We just need to multi-thread
our application.
Can identify the parallel bits
and isolate them in threads.
We can lock all our data.
We can write ourselves
a custom thread manager.
This is hard to do,
and it's even harder to get right.
And so back in Snow Leopard and iOS 4,
we introduced GCD.
And you really have to make
this just a fundamental part of
your app development technique.
You break your code
down into small blocks.
It's block based.
And then there's a very low overhead,
high performance scheduler that will
scale up and scale down based on the
computational resources available to you.
So we did this in development
of the iPad and iOS 4,
and that was a single core machine,
single core CPU for the iPad.
But because we built with GCD,
when we introduced the iPad 2,
we saw instant benefits in terms of
excellent utilization of both cores.
And in fact,
our use of GCD ended up being a huge
part of why the iPad 2 provides an
experience that's roughly twice as
fast as that of the original iPad.
So if you use GCD, you get a lot of that
parallelism for free.
Well,
GCD is improved now for iOS 5 and Lion.
You have now the ability to do serialized
scheduling of background I/O and also
to manage private concurrent queues.
So if you are not using GCD,
it's time to start.
Another area new to iOS is Core Image.
This is GPU accelerated image processing.
We brought a base set of 17 filters,
things like red eye detection,
face detection, color correction,
and so forth.
And these can actually be composed
in a variety of ways and built
into an optimized image processing
pipeline that executes in the
GPU to give you results really fast.
Now another kind of processing
that we can parallelize very well
is with the Accelerate framework,
which we heard about earlier
at the beginning of the talk.
This,
our image processing algorithms that,
and matrix processing algorithms that
we've hand tuned in assembly code
optimized for our specific platforms.
And they take advantage of the actual
vector instructions in ways that
mere mortals I think never could do.
We have a handful of people in
the world who know how to do this.
And they've done it to these
algorithms in the Accelerate framework.
So if you have an algorithm
that's covered by Accelerate,
you really want to
take advantage of this.
We see performance advantages relative
to naive implementations of as much
as 10x for Accelerate algorithms.
And we brought the full set now to iOS.
Now of course,
no matter how much you take advantage
of these technologies up front,
to really optimize your app,
you need to measure.
instruments let you get a great view
of the performance of your application.
It does performance sampling
of both memory use and CPU,
provides ways to create rerunable
UI automation scenarios so you can test
your app under different circumstances.
And now for iOS 5 and Lion,
we have retained cycle debugging
to help you find leaks and
set up weak references.
And for iOS,
we also brought SysTrace to iOS to
give you better debugging information.
And as you'll hear later this afternoon,
fantastic OpenGL performance tools
to give you a level of insight into
your OpenGL performance that I think
you've never seen on any platform.
I want to talk now about security.
We all know that iOS has a sandboxing
model that allows applications to be
kept so that each of them has access only
to their data and we're an application
to run wild or become compromised.
The only damage you can do is to its
own data because its data is locked with
it in the sandbox and it can't get out.
Well,
we want to bring sandboxing to line,
but you have to say, well,
this is a really challenging problem
because here we have applications,
which you see at the top that have
access or need to have access to
files that the user is organized into
common places in the file system.
They may have a bunch of
documents in their desktop
or in their documents folder.
In fact, a single document may be used
by multiple applications.
You may first open an image in
an image editor and then you
may open it in preview later,
so they all need access.
So how can we accomplish
the get the benefits of
sandboxing inside of a Mac app?
Well, what we've done is when you
sandbox your application,
it in fact is in a sandbox
and it has some private data,
the equivalent to what would be until
the library application support and
preferences and caches and so forth.
But it doesn't actually have
access to its documents.
So if it tries to go out and grab a
particular path in the file system,
it can't.
So how do we let the user actually
get at the files they want?
Well, if the user does something.
Like opening the open panel, save panel,
dragging a file in finder on
top of an app icon or a window,
we contact something called PowerBox.
PowerBox is a privileged system process
that displays its UI such that it
looks like it's running inside the app,
but it's actually not.
And it knows that, oh, the user actually,
this user explicitly tried
to access that RTF file.
And when it does,
then the PowerBox is able to
dynamically extend the file.
So it can extend that application
sandbox to poke a hole in it such
that it can access just that file.
So at this point,
the user has the view that
actually TextEdit can access any
document they want to open when
in fact at the security level,
TextEdit can only access that
one file that the user has
asked or granted the permission,
if you will,
for sandbox for TextEdit to access.
Works really well.
So yeah, it's pretty good.
Now, how do you set up a sandbox in Lion?
Well, it's set up with
entitlements like an iOS,
and as I mentioned,
it prevents really either an
app that has programming errors,
let's assume there are no
malicious apps out there,
but one that has programming errors
or one that's become compromised.
You know, had a security vulnerability,
someone compromised that app,
took it over,
and now it's maybe doing bad things.
You can sandbox your apps really easily.
In fact, we've taken third party
apps without source code
applied the entitlements to them and
been able to run them in the sandbox in
many cases without modification because
a lot of in a lot of cases these power
matter just setting your entitlements and
things like power box work transparently
for you But you do need to make sure
that if you've hard-coded paths in
your UI Instead of use the proper query
api's you know things change when you're
in the sandbox those paths won't be
accessible where you think they are
You need to code sign your app which
you can do in Xcode and you need to
set the minimum set of Entitlements that
are necessary for your app to function
So what are these entitlements there
things like does this app need to have
power box to let user open documents?
You know if it's a game the answer
may well be no all the data is
already stored in the sandbox There's
no need to go outside the sandbox
Does it need to access common media
like movies or pictures or music
does it need access to the network?
Does it need access to the
mic or the camera or personal
identity of personal information?
All of these are expressible as
entitlements and you can set them
up in Xcode There are also are A set
of temporary exception entitlements
Okay These are entitlements that
because we recognize you've written
your applications in the past and they
may be do have certain coding practices
that in the near term Won't work
in the sandbox you can ask for very
specific Holes up front to be placed
in your sandbox to do things that are
not generally safe in the sandbox model
We will be requiring six months from
when Lion ships for apps submitted
to the app store to be sandboxed.
And you need to justify your entitlement.
So if you write a screen
saver and you say,
well, I need access to the address book
and the calendar and the microphone,
then you should just tell us
why it is that your screen
saver needs those things.
I'm sure you have a great reason.
But if you don't,
then that will be a problem
for getting the app accepted.
And if you use any of these
temporary entitlements,
you need to tell us why they're needed.
And those temporary exceptions,
of course, are temporary.
This is just a transition strategy
so you can get your app clean,
running in the sandbox in
the safest way possible.
So another security feature,
data protection in iOS.
By default, if a user has a PIN,
all the data is encrypted
at the device level.
But you have an additional
capability with data protection
to lock the data to an own device.
Only the user is actually logged
in with their PIN currently.
So it unlocks on the fly and
relocks when the user is logged
effectively not past the PIN screen.
We now have support in Core Data to
make it really easy for your
Core Data apps to take advantage,
to allow offer your users this additional
level of protection if it makes sense.
FileVault2 FileVault2 is a
completely new implementation.
It's based on a new volume
format called Core Storage and
it encrypts the entire drive.
You cannot boot your Mac when
you're using this without first
actually entering your password.
We have a new feature called FileVault2.
It's a login screen that makes it look
like you're logging into your Mac,
but actually it hasn't even booted yet.
And when you do,
we unlock the drive and boot.
So there's no way that secure files,
files you want to keep protected,
can leak outside of the domain
of the encryption because the
entire drive is encrypted.
You may say, well,
I'm a little worried about that because
that means everything's encrypted.
Maybe I'm going to pay
a big performance cost.
But in fact, we have incredibly optimized
algorithms that take advantage of
the special encryption instruction
sets and the latest Intel processors.
And we have a new feature
called FileVault2.
To make encryption basically
completely transparent.
And so if you have a laptop and you
care about protecting your data,
FileVault2 is a phenomenal solution.
And I personally run with it exclusively.
So our final.
Yes, run with it.
It's great.
So our final area of user
expectation is around connectivity.
Now you saw earlier today
Twitter and the tweet sheet.
So the real important story
here is that within settings,
you have single sign-on.
Your user sets up once for Twitter,
and then all the apps that need to
use Twitter can access that without
requiring specific sign-on from the user.
If you want to let them
tweet URLs and images,
well, you can just use the tweet sheet.
But you also have arbitrary
API access using TW request to make
other Twitter requests as well.
So it's a really convenient way to
add Twitter to your applications.
Of course, the big story around being
connected is around iCloud.
And iCloud is about storing your data
in the cloud and making it wirelessly
available on all of your devices.
But it's also about being built in to
applications so that users actually don't
have to think about the cloud at all.
Each application has a private
piece of the cloud where it can
store its data and keep its data
available across all devices that
are running that application.
Cloud storage breaks into two
fundamental capabilities-- the key
value store and mobile documents.
So the key value store is like
a dictionary in the sky or an
NS mutable dictionary in the sky.
It's meant for small data.
So it has a limited number of keys
and a limited size of these keys.
We're talking tens of kilobytes
that you have to work with here.
And it's really meant for
things like what page am
I currently on in my notebook?
What level am I on in
this game right now?
And this data is actually
synchronized asynchronously.
It's synchronized with the devices,
whether or not they're
currently running your app,
such that when you then start
that app on another device,
the data is already there and available.
So this is really easy to use,
really convenient.
And you should really have all of
those kinds of app settings available
here with the key value store.
The other big one, of course,
is the dictionary store,
or the mobile documents.
This lets you have your
documents available everywhere.
Your app writes its documents into
cloud storage in a private sandbox.
And then the data is
automatically transferred
asynchronously up to the cloud.
And the actual metadata about the file is
transferred asynchronously from the data.
And this is important for responsiveness,
because if you make an update,
for instance,
on your iPhone or create a new document,
both the metadata and the data
can get stored up in the cloud.
And the metadata can move down
automatically to all devices.
So they all know about
the existence of the file,
what the current version is,
and so forth.
But the actual data,
which is the large part,
can move later or only when it's needed.
The user could pull it down on demand,
if that's the way you want to do it.
And while it can pull from the cloud,
as well, if two machines or two
devices are on the same LAN,
when it comes time to get data,
it can actually pull it across the
LAN without taking the additional
bandwidth to go up to the internet.
So the data is encrypted for both
transfer and it's encrypted and
storage when it's stored with us.
It's stored in a geographical
location that's close to the user.
So you aren't sending all your data
to Cupertino if you're in Germany.
It's going to be a low latency
connection to get to your data.
And, you know, once your users stored
your data in the cloud,
you may want to provide them
the ability to share it.
And so there's an API to actually
get URLs that you can then hand out
through email or whatever in your app
so that they can then pass that off to
friends or family and they can download
documents that are stored in the cloud.
Yeah, it's useful.
So how do you enable cloud storage?
Well, first of all, give users a choice.
The expectation is,
and you saw this in Roger's iWork demo,
that when the app starts up,
it's going to say,
do you want to put your
documents in cloud storage?
Maybe they do, maybe they don't.
Give them a choice.
If they choose yes,
and I think most of them will,
you can request entitlements to cloud
storage that will give you access to
your cloud storage sandbox folder.
And then, well, if you're using our new
UI document support in iOS 5,
or if you're already
using NS Document on Lion,
you have built-in support to actually get
that document and put it in the cloud.
It's really easy.
If you insist on not doing that,
you can roll your own.
Again, we have APIs in NS File Manager,
NS File Presenter,
and File Coordinator that help
you coordinate when data can come
in from the cloud and when you're
making modifications to the document
so that you don't get smashed by
edits happening in another way.
This is because the system actually
has really smart policies around
helping you resolve conflicts,
automatically resolve conflicts,
should concurrent editing occur.
Also, if you're a core data app,
there's great news,
because core data makes it possible for
you to have your core data database,
or perhaps for a shoebox app,
for instance,
automatically synced via iCloud storage.
Go Core Data.
So as I mentioned,
the storage for your is normally
on a per application basis,
and that's normally keyed by the
bundle ID of your application.
That's what gives you access to
your particular piece of the cloud.
But you may have an application
on the Mac that has a different
bundle ID than the copy of your
application available for iOS.
And in that case,
they're different bundle IDs.
And we have a mechanism that lets
you actually collect those two and
allow them to access the same area.
Or you might have a lite version,
a free version of your app,
and a pro version of your app.
And you may want to allow
users to upgrade without having
them suddenly unable to access
their common cloud storage.
And so there are APIs to let you do
that kind of collection of multiple
applications data under a common domain.
That domain must be tied to your company,
though.
So this isn't about ganging
together multiple apps across
vendors and providing access.
So you've built your great app.
You've taken advantage of all of these
platform APIs and the ones you're
going to hear about later today.
And whether you did it
for love or for money,
the chances are that you want to
get it out to a lot of people.
And you want to get it to market.
Well, how do we do this?
Well, of course,
we have these great app stores.
We made some enhancements.
You heard about earlier today in-app
purchase on the Mac App Store.
We now have Store Kit.
And the APIs are extremely
similar for in-app purchase
to what you're used to on iOS,
pretty much identical.
We support delta updates.
It just works.
You submit your package
just as you did before.
We compute the deltas ourselves as part
of our ingest process into the app store.
And we'll give your users just the
changes when they go to do downloads.
We've also enabled push notifications.
You also heard-- I'm going to tell
you about how we have Newsstand.
If you have a
subscription-based application,
there are APIs to allow you to
get those much more elegantly
in front of your users.
But if you're in this marketplace,
you really want to go global.
We have over 90 countries supported
by the app store and over 41
languages with millions of users.
And if you've talked to developers who've
taken their app and focused on making
it available to non-English languages,
they're going to be able to get that.
So we've got a lot of
different ways to do that.
We've got a lot of
We've got a lot of different ways
There's really a phased
approach to making your app
available to other locales.
First, localize the metadata for your
application in the app store.
People are going to have a
lot better time finding it if,
in fact, they can read what in the heck
your app is when they look at
the description in the app store.
You can then internationalize your app.
There are system APIs that make sort of
common things easy to do internationally.
If you take advantage of them,
you're covered.
And then you get down to
translation of the content and
the templates of your document.
Well,
sometimes that translation is going to
affect the layout of the application.
And we have new technology
in Lion that allows you,
when you localize the app,
to have a lot of that layout
done for you automatically.
It's actually called Auto Layout.
So, if you've set up -- yes,
Auto Layout is fantastic.
If you've set up, let's say,
something in interface builder like
this -- and you know when you drag
something in interface builder,
you get those little guides
that come out that kind of say,
"Oh, okay, you look like you're
about the right distance.
I know these two things seem to be
different." And you can see that
they're all connected together.
Well, now,
those automatically establish constraints
or relationships between the controls
or the borders of the documents.
So, now, you save something like
this that's a placeholder.
And when you fill it with real text,
For instance, as the English text,
when I put the German text
and things get bigger,
it actually can cause the entire
UI to adjust the panel to get taller,
for instance.
If the user picks, for instance,
a right-to-left language,
it in fact can actually mirror the UI.
Auto Layout is really useful
technology whether or not you're
using it for localization,
but it's great for localization as well.
So those are app stores.
We hope you commercialize your app
or give it away very successfully.
And hopefully you can get one of these
checks from Apple for a bazillion
simoleons or whatever it may be.
And if not, at least get a lot of
love from your users.
So this has been just skimming
the surface of some of what's
new on our three platforms.
We have two great talks coming
this afternoon around the dev
tools and around graphics,
and a whole host of sessions available
to you for the rest of the week.
Thank you very much and
have a fantastic WWDC.